# Goroutine, defer, panic, recover

Goroutines are also often called green threads. Green threads are maintained and scheduled by the language runtime instead of the operating systems. The cost of memory consumption and context switching, of a goroutine is much lesser than an OS thread.

## Concurrency Synchronization

A live goroutine may stay in (and switch between) two states, running and blocking. A goroutine is still considered to be running if it is asleep (aftter calling time.Sleep function) or awaiting the response of a system call or a network connection.

When a goroutine is created, it will enter the running state automatically. Goroutines can only exit from running state, and never from blocking state. If for any reason, a goroutine stays in blocking state forever, then it will never exit.

A blocking goroutine can only be unblocked by an operation made in another goroutine. If all goroutines in a Go program are in blocking state, then all of them will stay in blocking state forever.

## Goroutine Schedule

Not all goroutines in running state are being executed at a given time. At any given time, the maximum number of goroutines being executed will not exeed the number of logical CPUs avaialable for the current program. Each logical CPU can only execute one goroutine at any given time.

Go runtime must frequently switch execution contexts between goroutines to let each running goroutine have a chance to execute. This is similar to how operating systems switch execution contexts between OS threads.

## Goroutine Schedule

Not all goroutines in running state are being executed at a given time. At any given time, the maximum number of goroutines being executed will not execeed the number of logical CPUs available for the current goroutine. Each logical CPU can only execute one goroutine at any given time. Go routine must frequently switch execution contexts between goroutines to let each running goroutine have a chance to execute.

**Running state** includes sleeping, system calling, queuing, executing...
**Blocking**

Goroutine life cycle: create -> running -> blocking -> running -> exit

The standard Go runtime adopts the M-P-G model to do the goroutine schedule job, where M represents OS threads, P represents logical/virtual processors (not logical CPUs) and G represents goroutines. Most schedule work is made by logical processors (Ps), which act as brokers by attaching goroutines (Gs) to OS threads (Ms). Each OS thread can only be attached to at most one goroutine at any given time, and each goroutine can only be attached to at most one OS thread at any given time. A goroutine can only get executed when it is attached to an OS thread. A goroutine which has been executed for a while will try to detach itself from the corresponding OS thread, so tha tother running goroutines can have a chance to get attached and executed.

At runtime. we can call the runtime.GOMAXPROCS function to get and set the number of logical processors (Ps). For some file IO heavy programs, a GOMAXPROCS value larger than runtime.NumCPU() may be helpful.

## Deferred Function Calls

### The Evaluation Moment of the Arguments of Deferred and Goroutine Function Calls

- For a deferred function call, the invocation moment is the moment when it is pushed into the defer-call stack of its caller goroutine.
- For a goroutine function call, the invocation moment is the moment when the corresponding goroutine is created.

```go
// output: 2,1,0,3,3,3
func main() {
	func() {
		for i := 0; i < 3; i++ {
			defer fmt.Println("a:", i)
		}
	}()
	fmt.Println()
	func() {
		for i := 0; i < 3; i++ {
			defer func() {
				fmt.Println("b:", i)
			}()
		}
	}()
}
```