# Go Type System Overview

## Concept: Basic Types

Built-in type: string, bool, int8,16,32...

## Concept: Composite Types

Pointer, struct, function, container (array, slice, map), channel, interface types

## Syntax: Type Alias Declarations

There are only two built-in type aliases in Go, byte (alias of uint8) and rune (alias of int32).

## Concept: Defined Types vs Non-Defined Types

A defined type is a type defined in a type definition
All basic types are defined. A non-defined type must be a composite type

```go
type A []string // defined type
type B = A // defined type
type C = []string // non defined type
```

## Concept: Underlying types

In Go, each type has an underlying type. Rules:
- for built-in types, the respective underlying types are themselves
- for the Pointer type defined in the unsafe standard code package, its underlying type is itself.
- the underlying type of a non-defined type which must be a composite type, is itself
- in a type declaration, the newly declared type and the source type have the same underlying type

```go
// The underlying types of the following ones are both int
type (
    MyInt int 
    Age MyInt
)

type (
    IntSlice []int // underlying type is []int
    MyIntSlice []MyInt // underlying type is []MyInt
    AgeSlice []Age // underlying type is []Age
)
```

How can an underlying type be traced given a user declared type? The rule is, when a built-in basic type or a non-defined type is met, the tracing should be stopped. 

## Concept: Value Parts

At run time, many values are stored somewhere in memory. In Go, each of such values has a direct part. However, some of them have one or more indirect parts. Each value part occupies in a continuous memory segment. The indirect underlying parts of a value are referenced by its direct part through safe or unsafe pointers.