# Channels in Go

Channel is an important built-in feature in Go. It is one of the features that makes Go unique.

## Channel Introduction

Don't communicate by sharing memory, share memory by communicating (through channels). Communicating by sharing memory and sharing memory by communicating are two programming manners in concurrent programming. When goroutines communicate by sharing memory, we use traditional concurrency synchronization techniques, such as mutex locks, to protect the shared memory to prevent data races. We can use channels to implement sharing memory by communicating.

Go provides a unique concurrency synchronization technique, channel. Channels make goroutines share memory by communicating. We can view a channel as an internal FIFO (first in, first out) queue within a program. Some goroutines send values to the queue (the channel) and some other goroutines receive values from the queue.

Along with transferring values through channels, the ownership of some values may also be transferred between goroutines. When a goroutine sends a value to a channel, we can view the goroutine releases the ownership of some values. When a goroutine receives a value from a channel, we can view the goroutine acquires the ownerships of some values. 


Honestly, each concurrency synchronization technique has its own best use scenarios. But channel has a wider application range and has more variety in using. One problem of channels is, the experience of programming with channels is so enjoyable and fun that programmers often even prefer to use channels for the scenarios which channels are not best for.

## Channel Types and Values

## Channel value comparisons

All channel types are comparable types

Channel values are multi-part values. If one channel value is assigned to another, the two channels share the same underlying parts. In other words, those two channels represent the same internal channel object. The result of comparing them is true.

## Detailed Explanations for Channel Operations

|Operation|A nil channel|A closed channel|A not-close non-nil channel|
|Close|Panic|Panic|succeed to close|
|Send value to|block for ever|panic|block or succeed to send|
|Receive value from|block for ever|never block|block or succeed to receive|

We can think of each channel consisting of the three queues (all can be viewed as FIFO queues) internally: 

1. The receiving goroutine queue (generally FIFO). The queue is a linked list without size limitation. Goroutines in this queue are all in blocking state and waiting to receive values from that channel.

2. The sending goroutine queue (generally FIFO). The queue is also a linked list without size limitation. Goroutines in this queue are all in blocking state and waiting to send values to that channel. 

3. The value buffer queue. This is a circular queue. Its size is equal to the capacity of the channel.

Each channel internally holds a mutex lock which is used to avoid data races in all kinds of operations.

**When a goroutine R tries to receive a value from a not-closed non-nil channel**

Goroutine R will acquire the lock associated with the channel firstly

1. If the value buffer queue of the channel is not empty, in which case the receiving goroutine queue of the channel must be empty, the goroutine R will receive (by unshifting) a value from the value buffer queue. If the sending goroutine queue of the channel is also not empty, a sending goroutine will be unshifted out of the sending goroutine queue and resumed to running state again. The value the just unshifted sending goroutine trying to send will be pushed into the value buffer queue of the channel. The receiving goroutine R continues running.

2. Otherwise (the value buffer queue of the channel is empty), if the sending goroutine queue of the channel is not empty, in which case the channel must be an unbuffered channel, the receiving goroutine R will unshift a sending goroutine trying to end. The just unshifted sending goroutine will get unblocked and resumed to running state again. The receiving goroutine R continues running. For this senario, the channel receive operation is called a non-blocking operation.

3. If the buffer queue and the sending goroutine queue of the channel are both empty, the goroutine R will be pushed into the receiving goroutine queue of the channel and enter blocking state.

**When a goroutine S tries to send a value to a not-closed non-nil channel**

Goroutine R will acquire the lock associated with the channel firstly

1. If the receiving goroutine queue of the channel is not empty, in which case the value buffer queue of the channel must be empty, the sending goroutine S will unshift receiving goroutine from the receiving goroutine queue of the channel and send the value to the just unshifted receiving goroutine.  The just unshifted receiving goroutine queue will get unblocked and resumed to running state again. The sending goroutine S continues running. For this scenario, the channel send operation is called a non-blocking operation.

2. Otherwise (the receiving goroutine is empty), if the value buffer queue of the channel is not full, in which case the sending goroutine queue must be also empty, the value the sending goroutine S trying to send will be pused into the value buffer queue, and the sending goroutine S continues running.

3. If the receiving goroutine is empty and the value buffer queue of the channel is already full, the sending goroutine S will be pushed into the sending goroutine queue of the channel and enter blocking state.

**When a goroutine tries to close a not-closed non-nil channel**

Once the goroutine has acquired the lock of the channel, both of the following two steps will be performed by the following order.

1. If the receiving goroutine queue of the channel is not empty, in which case the value buffer of the channel must be empty, all the goroutines in the receiving goroutine queue of the channel will be unshifted one by one, each of them will receive a zero value of the element type of the channel and be resumed to running state.

2. If the sending goroutine queue of the channel is not empty, all the goroutines is the sending goroutine queue of the channel will be unshifted one by one and each of them will produce a panic for sending on a closed channel.

According to the explanations listed above, we can get some facts about the internal queues of a channel. 

- If the channel is closed, both its sending goroutine queue and receiving goroutine queue must be empty, but its value buffer queue may not be empty, but its value buffer queue may not be empty.

- At any time, if the value buffer is not empty, then its receiving goroutine queue must be empty.
- At any time, if the value buffer is not full, then its sending goroutine queue must be empty.
- If the channel is buffered, then at any time, at least one of the channel's goroutine queues must be empty (sending, receving or both)
- If the channel is unbuffered, most of the time one of its sending goroutine queue and the receiving goroutine queue must be empty, with one exeception. The exception is that a goroutine may be pushed into both of the two queues when executing a select control flow code block.

## Channel element values are transferred by copy

When a value is transferred from one goroutine to another goroutine, the value will be copied at least one time. If the transferred value ever stayed in the value buffer of a channel, then two copies will happen in the transfer process. One copy happens when the value is copied  from the sender goroutine into the value buffer, the other happens when the value is copied from the value buffer to the receiver goroutine. Like value assignments and function argument passing, when a value is transferred, only its direct part is copied. So if the passed value size is too large, it is best to use a pointer element type instead, to avoid a large value copy cost.

## About channel and goroutine garbage collections

A channel is referrenced by all goroutines in either the sending or the receiving goroutine queue of the channel, so if neither of the queues of the channel is empty, the channel cannot be garbage collected. On the other hand, if a goroutine is blocked and stays in either the sending or the receiving goroutine queue of the channel, then the goroutine also cannot be garbage collected. A goroutine can only be garbage collected when it has already exited.

## for-range on Channels

The for-range control flow code block applies to channels. The loop will try to iteratively receive the values sent to a channel, until the channel is closed and its value buffer queue becomes blank. With for-range syntax on arrays, slices and maps, multiple iteration variables are allowed.

```go
for v := range aChannel {
    // use v
}

// is equivalent to
for {
    v, ok := <- aChannel
    if !ok {
        break
    }
    // use v
}
```

## select-case control flow code blocks

No expressions and statements are allowed to follow the select keyword

No fallthrough statements are allowed to be used in case branches

Each statement following a case keyword in a select-case code block must be either a channel receive operation or a channel send operation statement.

If there are one or more non-blocking case operations, Go runtime will randomly select one of these non-blocking operations to execute.

If all the case operations in a select-case code block are blocking operations, the default will be selected to execute if the default branch is present. If the default branch is absent, the current goroutine will be pushed into the corresponding sending goroutine queue or receiving goroutine queue of every channel involved in all case operations, then enter blocking state.
