# Channels in Go

Channel is an important built-in feature in Go. It is one of the features that makes Go unique.

## Channel Introduction

Don't communicate by sharing memory, share memory by computation (through channels).

Along with transferring values through channels, the ownership of some values may also be transferred between goroutines. When a goroutine sends a value to a channel, we can view the goroutine releases the ownership of some values.

Communicating by sharing memory and sharing memory by communicating are two programming manners in concurrent programming. When goroutines communicate by sharing memory, we use traditional concurrency synchronization techniques, such as mutex locks, to protect the shared memory to prevent data racts. We can use channels to implement sharing memory by communicating.

Go provides a unique concurrency synchronization technique, channel. Channels make goroutine share memory by communicating. We can view channel as an internal FIFO (first in, first out) queue within a program. Some goroutines send values to the queue and some other goroutines receive values from the queue.

Along with transferring values (through channels), the ownership of some values may also be transferred between goroutines. When a goroutine sends a value to a channel, we can view goroutine releases the ownership of some values. When a goroutine receives a value from a channel, we can view the goroutine acquires the ownerships of some values.

## Channel Types and Values

## Channel value comparisons

All channel types are comparable types

Channel values are multi-part values. If one channel value is assigned to another, the two channels share the same underlying parts. In other words, those two channels represent the same internal channel object. The result of comparing them is true.