# Type Embedding

## Which TYpes Can be Embedded?

An embedded field must be specified as a type name T or as a pointer to a non-interface type name *T, and T it self may not be a pointer type.

## What is the meaningfulness of type embedding?

The main purpose of type embedding is to extend the functionalities of the embedded types into the embedding type, so that we don't need to re-implement the functionalities of the embedded types for the embedding type.

If a type T inherits another type, then type T obtains the abilities of the other type. At the same time, each value of type T can also be viewed as a value of the other type.

If a type T embeds another type, then type other type becomes a part of type T obtains the abilities of the other type, but none values of type T can be viewed as values of the other type.

## Does the Embedding type obtain the fields and methods of the embedded types?

```go
type Person struct {
	Name string
}

func (p Person) PrintName() {
	fmt.Println("name")
}

func (p *Person) SetAge() {
	fmt.Println("set age")
}

type singer struct {
	Person
}

func main() {
	pt := reflect.TypeOf(singer{})
	fmt.Println(pt, "has", pt.NumMethod(), "methods:")
	pt1 := reflect.TypeOf(&singer{})
	fmt.Println(pt1, "has", pt1.NumMethod(), "methods:")
}
```

## Implicit Methods for Embedding Types

As mentioned above, both of type Singer and type *Singer have a PrintName method each, and the type *Singer also has a SetAge method. However, we never explicitly declare these methods for the two types. Where do these methods come from?

- For each method of the embedded type T, if the selectors to that method neither collide with nor are shadowed by other selectors, then compilers will implicitly declare a corresponding method with the same prototype for the embedding struct type S. A consequently, compilers will also implicitly declare a corresponding method for the type *S 
- For each method of the embedded type *T, if the selectors to that method neither colide with nor are shadowed by other selectors, then compilers will implicitly declare a corresponding method with the same prototype for the pointer type *S.