# Go Value Copy Costs

Value copying happens frequently in Go programming. Values assignments, argument passing and channel value send operations are all value copying involved.

## Value Sizes

The size of a value means how many bytes the direct part of the value will occupy in memory. The indirect underlying parts of a value don't contribute to the size of the value.

In Go, if the types of two values belong to the same kind, and the type kind is not string kind, interface kind, array kind and struct kind, then the sizes of the two value are always equal.

In fact, for the standard Go compiler/runtime, the sizes of two string values are also always equal. The same relation is for the sizes of two interface values.

The size of a struct type depends on all of the sizes and the order of its fields. For there may be some padding bytes being inserted between two adjcent struct fields to guarantee certain memory address alignment requirements of these fields, so the size of a struct type must be not smaller then the sum of the respective type sizes of its fields.


|Kinds of Types|Value Size|
|-|-|
|bool|1 byte|
|int8, uint8|1 byte|
|int16, uint16|2 byte|
|int32 (rune), uint32, float32|4 bytes|
|int64, uint64, float64|8 bytes|
|int, uint|1 words|
|uintptr|1 word|
|string|2 words|
|pointer (safe or unsafe)|1 word|
|slice|3 words|
|map|1 word|
|channel|1 word|
|function|1 word|
|interface|2 words|
|struct||
|array||

## Value Copy Costs

Generally speaking, the cost to copy a value is proportional to the size of the value. However, value sizes are not the only factor determining value copy costs.

We can view struct values with less than 5 fields and with sizes not larger than four native words as small-size values. The costs of coyping small-size values are small.

We seldom use pointer types whose base types are slice types, map types, channel types, function types, string types and interface types. The costs of copying values of these assumed base types are very small.