# Code and project organization

## Unintended variable shadowing

In Go, a variable name declared in a block may be redeclared in an inner block. This principles, called variable shadowing, is prone to common mistakes.

```go
// stupid
var client *http.Client
if tracing {
    // client is shadowed (redeclared) in this block 
    client, err := createClientWithTracing()
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }
    log.Println(client)
}
// use client
```

```go
// solution 1
var client *http.Client 
if tracing {
    c, err := createClientWithTracing()
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }
    client = c
}
// use client
```

```go
// solution 2
var client *http.Client
var err error
if tracing {
    client, err = createClientWithTracing()
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }
} else {
    // 
}
// use client
```

## Unnecessary nested code

```go
if s1 == "" {
    return err
} else {
    if s2 == "" {
        return err
    } else {
        if s3 == "" {
            return err
        } else {
            return 
        }
    }
}
```

## Misusing init functions

init functions are sometimes misused in Go applications. The potential consequences are poor error management or a code flow that is harder to understand. 

### Concepts

An init function is a function taking no arguments and returining no result (a func() function). When a package is initialized, all the constants and variables declarations in the package are evaluated. Then the init functions are executed.

```go
var a = func() any {
	fmt.Println("Run first")
	return nil
}()

func init() {
	fmt.Println("init function")
}

func main() {
	fmt.Println("Run main")
}
```

### When to use init functions

```go
var db *sql.DB
func init() {
    dataSourceName := os.Getenv("MYSQL_DATA_SOURCE_NAME")
    d, err := sql.Open("mysql", dataSourceName)
    if err != nil {
        log.Panic(err)
    }
    err = d.Ping()
    if err != nil {
        log.Panic(err)
    }
    db = d
}
```

Let's describe three main downsides.

First, error management in an init function is limited. Only ways to signal an error is to panic

Another downside is related to testing. If we add tests to this file, the init function will be executed before running the test cases

The last downsides is that it requires assigning the database connection pool to a global variable. Global variables have some severe drawbacks

- Any functions can alter them
- Make unit tests more complicated

## Overusing getters and setters

```go
currentBanlance := customer.Balance()
if currentBanlance < 0 {
    customer.SetBalance(0)
}
```

## 2.5 Interface pollution

The bigger interface, the weaker abstraction. Everything should be made as simple as possible, but no simpler. Make interface as easy as possible to understand, though of course not so easy that it becomes meaningless.

We can also more a performance overhead when calling a method through an interface. It requires a lookup in a hashtable data structure to find the concrete type it's pointing to.

In summary, we should be cautions when creating abstractions in our code. Again, abstraction should be discovered, not created. It's pretty frequent for us, software developers to overengineer our code by trying to guess what would be the perfect level of abstraction based on what we think we might need later on. This process should be avoided as, in most cases, it pollutes our code with unnecessary abstractions, making it more complex to read. Last but not least, if it's unclear how an interface makes the code better, we should probably consider removing it to make our code simpler.

Don't design with interfaces, discover them.

### 2.5.1 When to use interfaces?

**Common behavior**

When multiples types implement a common behavior. In such a case, we can factor the behavior inside an interface.

For example, sorting a collection can be factored out via three methods:

- Retrieving the number of elements in the collection
- Reporting whether one element must be sorted before another
- Swapping two elements

```go
type Interface interface {
    Len() int
    Less(i, j int) bool
    Swap(i, j int)
}
```

**Decoupling**

Another important use case is about decoupling our code from an implementation. If we rely on an abstraction instead of a concrete implementation, the implementation itself can be replaceable with another without even having to change our code; this is the Liskov Substitution Pricinple.

Let's assume we have to implement a CreateNewCustomer method that creates a new customer and stores it. We can decide to rely on the concrete implementation directly

```go
type CustomerService struct {
    // relies on actual implementation to store a Customer, we are obliged to test it through integration tests which require spinning up a MySQL instance
    store mysql.Store
}

func (cs CustomerService) CreateNewCustomer(id string) error {
    customer := Customer{id: id}
    return cs.store.StoreCustomer(customer)
}
```

Which can done by using interface

```go
type customerStorer interface {
    StoreCustomer(Customer) error
}

type CustomerService struct {
    storer customerStorer
}

func (cs CustomerService) CreateNewCustomer(id string) error {
    customer := Customer{id: id}
    return cs.storer.StoreCustomer(customer)
}
```

**Restricting behavior (enforce read-only)**

```go
type intConfigGetter interface {
    Get() int
}

// in our code, we could rely on intConfigGetter instead of the concrete implementation
type Foo struct {
    threshold intConfigGetter
}

func NewFoo(threshold intConfigGetter) Foo {
    return Foo{threshold: threshold}
}

func (f Foo) Bar() {
    threshold := f.threshold.Get()
}
```

### 2.5.3 Interface pollution

We shouldn't start by creating abstractions in our code if there is no immediate reason for it. We shouldn't design with interfaces but wait for a concrete need. Said differently, we should create an interface when we need it, not when we foresee that we could need it.

If we don't have a strong reason for adding an interface and it's unclear how an interface makes a code better, we should challenge this interface's purpose. Why not call the implementation directly?

Where should an interface live?

- Producer side: an interface defined in the same package as the concrete implementation
- Consumer side: an interface defined in an external package, where it's used

As mentioned, interfaces are satisfied implicitly in Go which tends to be a game-changer compared to languages with an explicit implementation. Abstractions should be discovered, not created. In means that it's not up to the producer to force a given abstraction for all the clients. Instead, it's up to the client to decide whether he needs some form of abstraction and then determine what's the best abstraction level for his needs. 

The main point is that the client package can now define the most accurate abstraction for its need. It relats to the concept of the Interface-Segregation Principle, which states that no client should be forced to depend on methods it doesn't use.

Therefore, in this case, the best approach is to expose the concrete implementation on the producer side and let the clients decide how to use it and whether an abstraction is needed.

In particular contexts, for example, when we know (not foresee) that an abstraction will be helpful for consumers, we may want to have it on the producer side.

In summary, we should be cautions when creating abstractions in our code. Again, abstractions should be discovered, not created. It's pretty frequent for use, to overengineer our code by trying to guess what would be perfect level of abstraction based on what we think we might need later on. This process should be avoided as, in most cases, it pollutes our code with unnecessary abstractions, making it more complex to read. Let's not try to solve a problem abstractly but solve what has to be solved now. Last but not least, if it's unclear how an interface makes the code better, we should probably consider removing it to make our code simpler. 

## 2.6 Interface on the producer side

Producer side: an interface defined in the same package as the concrete implementation
Consumer side: an interface defined in an external package where it's used.

Abstraction should be discovered, not created. It means that it's not up to the producer to force a given abstraction for all the clients. Instead, it's up to the client to decide whether he needs some form of abstraction and then determine what's the best abstraction level for his needs. 

## Returning interfaces

While design a function signature, we may have to either return an interface of a concrete implementation. Returning an interface in Go which is considered a bad practice.

- Returning structs instead of interfaces
- Accepting interfaces if possible

## any says nothing

## Not using the functional options pattern

### Config struct

```go
type Config struct {
    Port int
}
```

### Builder pattern

### Function options pattern

There are different implementations with minor variations, the main idea is the following:

- An unexported struct holds the configuration: options
- Each option is a function that returns the same type: type Option func(options *options) error

```go
type options struct {
    port *int
}

type Option func(opts *options) error

func WithPort(port int) Option {
    return func (opts *options) error {
        if port < 0 {
            return errors.New("port should be positive")
        }
        options.port = &port
        return nil
    }
}

func NewServer(addr string, opts ...Option) (*http.Server, error) {
    var options options
    for _, opt := range opts {
        err := opt(&options)
        if err != nil {
            return nil, err
        }
    }
}
```

## Project misorganization

### Project structure

- /cmd: Main source files. The main.go of a foo application should live in /cmd/foo/main.go
- /internal: Private code that we don't want others importing in their applications or libraries
- /pkg: Public code that we want to expose to others
- /test
- /configs: configuration file
- /docs: Design and user documents
- /examples: Examples for our application and/or public library
- /api: api contract files (swagger, protocol buffers)
- /web: web asset
- /build: packaging and ci files
- /scripts

### Package organization

### Creating utility packages

### Ignoring package name collisions

```go
redis := redis.NewClient()
v, err := redis.Get("foo")
```

Here, the redis variable name collides with the redis package. Even through this is allowed, it should be avoided. Indeed, throughout the scope of the redis variable, the redis package isnt accessible anymore.

```go
// refactor
redisClient := redis.NewClient()
v, err := redisClient.Get("foo")
```
