# Concurrency: Foundations

## 8.2 Concurrency isn't always faster

### 8.2.1 Go scheduling

A thread is the smallest unit of processing that an OS can perform.

A CPU core executes different threads. When it switches from one thread to another, it executes an operation called context switching. The active thread consuming CPU cycles was in an executing date and moved to a runnable state, meaning ready to be executed but pending an avaiable core. Context switching is considered an expensive operation as the OS needs to save the current execution state of a thread before the switch.

As Go developers, we can't create threads directly, but we can create goroutines, which can be thought of as application-level threads. However, if an OS thread is context-switched on and off a CPU core by the OS, a goroutine is context-switched on and off an OS thread by the Go runtime.

Go scheduler uses the following terminology:

- G: goroutine
- M: OS thread (stands for machine)
- P: CPU core (stands for processor)

Each OS thread (M) is assigned to a CPU core (P) by the OS scheduler. Then each goroutine (G) runs on an OS thread (M). A goroutine has a simpler lifecycle than an OS thread. It can be either:

- Executing: the goroutine is scheduled on an M and executing its instructions
- Runnable: waiting for being in an executing state
- Waiting: stopped and pending for something to complete, such as a system callor a synchronization operation (e.g mutex)

## 8.3 Being puzzled about when to use channels or mutexes

## 8.4 Not understanding race problems

Race problems can be among the hardest and the most insidious bugs a programmer can face.